hello math fans the one silver lining of
the current covin 19 pandemic is I now
have much more free time to concentrate
on making videos so I thought I'd start
by explaining some of the mathematical
models that we use to model the spread
of infectious diseases the first one
being the si R model in the SI R model
the total population is divided up into
three categories or three components so
first we have s which is equal to
susceptibles so these will be people who
could potentially catch the disease then
we have AI these are called the
infective so this will be people who
currently have the disease and can
infect others and then R stands for
removed and this is the group of people
who have already caught to the disease
and have now either recovered from the
disease or have died with all
mathematical models we have to make
various assumptions to simplify the
real-world phenomena because things are
just too complicated to express
everything in a set of simple equations
so here the first assumption that we
make is that the epidemic is
sufficiently short so it doesn't last
that long so that we can assume that the
total population remains constant second
assumption in our model relates to the
way in which the disease is transmitted
and we assume that the rate of increase
in the infective x' is proportional to
the contact between susceptibles and
infective x' and we assume that this
occurs at a constant rate now our third
assumption relates to the removal rate
and this category are so we're going to
assume again that there is a constant
rate this could be a death rate or a
recovery rate but again I'm going to
assume that that is constant now that
we've made our assumptions we can start
to write down the equations that are
going to govern our model so remember
we're interested in si and are the
number of susceptibles infective and the
removed population so if we start with
the susceptibles
so the rate of change over time of the
number of susceptibles then based on our
assumptions we expect from number two
that it's going to decrease as people
become effective and so the rate of
change of the number of susceptibles
is going to be equal to minus because
it's decreasing the rate of contact ah
which is a sumption in number two and we
said that it was proportional to the
number of infective x' and the number of
susceptibles so these two letters being
here together is symbolizing a contact
between the number of infective x' and
number of susceptibles
and the R here is this rate of contact
or transmission between them now for the
effectives we have a similar equation so
we want to know the rate of change of AI
over time and this now will grow
according to people moving from
susceptible into infective so now we
have our eye s so the same term is what
we had for the first equation for the
rate of change of susceptibles but now
it's a plus because susceptibles are
moving to become infected and now we
also have by assumption three that
infective czar cover or die at a
constant rate so if you are an infective
then you then move into the third
category the R or the removed category
so here we have minus this constant rate
which I'm going to label a times the
number of infective x' and that just
leaves the final equation which is to
say that the rate of change of those
removed in the population must be equal
to the gain from here so as people are
lost from the infective category they
move into the removed category here at
the same rate we now have three
differential equations for are three
categories of people within the
population so s for susceptibles the
number of susceptibles is going to
decrease according to the number of
contacts between infective x' and
susceptibles i is the number of
effectives and this will increase due to
contact between people and decrease from
people either recovering or dying as a
result of the disease and finally the
removed category people that no longer
can catch the disease either because
they've recovered or have died this is
going to increase at this constant rate
depending on how many infective --zz
there are so we have differential
equations if you're familiar with these
you'll know you need some initial data
before you can solve the system of
equations and so the way we do this is
we define the initial number of
susceptible people in the population so
we say that is going to equal s naught
we then say the initial number of
infective x' will also be specified
let's call that I naught and in the very
start of the outbreak we don't expect
there to be anybody in this removed
section because nobody has yet recovered
or died from the disease
so the initial value of R will be zero
now we've yet to talk about assumption
one in the context of our model in the
context of our equations so if we go
back to this it says that the population
must remain constant during the epidemic
so what that actually means is that the
rate of change of susceptibles plus
infective x'
plus removed or added together must be
zero because the total population is
given by s plus I plus R we can actually
go one step further with this first
assumption and we can solve this
equation because we know the initial
conditions for the population so if the
total population doesn't change with
respect to time and that says it's the
same constant value for all possible
values of time and so we just take the
initial value to be a starting point
which is the value of the population at
the beginning but then as time
progresses it can't change because it
has a constant value so it's always
equal to that initial value now that
we've formed our differential equations
that together make up the si our model
we can start to ask some interesting
questions so the first question might be
will the disease spread so we have an
initial
number of infected people given by I
naught at the beginning of the epidemic
and what we want to know is will that
grow because if the number of infective
starts to grow then you have a spread of
a disease through a population so what
we're interested in is going to be the
race of change of the number of
infective --zz but before we do that we
actually want to start on the DS by DT
question because this tells us that the
rate of change of the number of
susceptibles
is equal to a negative value because R
is some positive constant it's a
transmission rate I is a number in a
population as is s so all of these three
things are positive and so the change of
s the rate of change of s is always
negative so this tells us that s must
always be smaller than its initial value
and this of course makes complete sense
I think in the context of a disease
because at the very beginning of the
outbreak everyone in the population in
theory is susceptible to the disease
especially with something new like kovat
19 that's never been seen before
so if s is always going to decrease
because its rate of change is negative
then this tells us that s must be less
than or equal to its initial value s
naught we can take this value this s
naught and plug it in to our di by DT
equation so we have an inequality now in
our rate of change for the number of
infected and we said an epidemic will
occur if the size of I increases from
the initial value of I 0 so to answer
our first question will the disease
spread it just comes down to the sign of
this particular constant here so if this
constant is positive then there will be
a spread of the disease so what that
means is that if s naught is greater
than a divided by R then the disease
will indeed
right this ratio here a / R is actually
a little easier to think about if you
flip it and consider what we call Q
where Q is equal to R divided by a and
is called the contact ratio this is the
fraction of the population that comes
into contact with an infected individual
during the period when they are
infectious we can also rearrange this
inequality to get a slightly different
version of the same condition for
whether or not an epidemic will occur so
if we multiply up by R and then divide
by a we create a new parameter our s
naught divided by a and this is called
the basic reproductive number or the
basic reproductive ratio and this
condition here tells us that we will
have an epidemic if this is greater than
1 this number R naught or the basic
reproductive ratio or basic reproductive
number is something that you may have
heard about in the context of Co vid 19
because this number represents the
number of secondary infections in the
population caused by one initial primary
infection so in other words if one
person has the particular disease then
the R naught value will tell you how
many infections on average that person
will cause so how many other people they
will give the disease to within the
population for seasonal flu the value of
R naught is somewhere between 1.5 and 2
whereas for Kovan 19 it's estimated to
be more like 3 to 4 so the exact numbers
are obviously still being determined
because this is a very much an ongoing
outbreak that we've never seen before
but the number is certainly much higher
than the 1.5 or two that you see for
seasonal flu and this is telling us that
for every one person infected with the
disease they are passing it on to three
or four other people which is why it is
spreading so rapidly all around the
world another question that we might be
interested in knowing the answer to is
what will be the maximum number of
infected
at any given time because knowing the
number of infected people is very
helpful when it comes to planning how to
distribute health resources so we want
to create an equation for I that's in
terms of various parameters that we know
within our system of equations and what
we do this time in fact is combine the
DS by DT equation with the DI by DT
equation so we take these two together
because if I do di by DT divided by the
s by DT I end up with an equation di by
D s so if we simplify this a little bit
these two terms are going to cancel
perfectly because they're exactly the
same so we get a minus 1 and then the
second term here the I will cancel in
both terms so we get plus a over R and
then with an S on the bottom thinking
back to our answer to question one about
the spread of the disease we introduced
this parameter Q which was equal to R
divided by a so if we rephrase that
final term in terms of Q we have minus 1
plus 1 divided by Q times s and this
equation di by D s equal to minus 1 plus
1 over Q s is something that we can now
integrate directly and actually solve
now we also of course have initial
conditions and that's what's going to
form the right-hand side of my equation
so our final equation is given in the
blue box at the bottom and it's just in
terms of I s this contact ratio Q which
is fixed by the model and the initial
conditions I naught and s naught whilst
we have this equation for I in terms of
s and the parameters of our model we
haven't yet found I max the maximum
number of infected at any given time
which is what we want to answer our
second question now we're normally
thinking about maximums and minimums of
functions you would differentiate the
function but fortunately we already have
the derivative from combining these
first two equations and so we can see
that this is the
when s is equal to 1 over Q because if s
is 1 over Q you have minus 1 plus 1
equals naught and so the maximum value
of I IMAX will actually occur in this
equation when s is equal to 1 over Q
substituting this value into our
equation and rearranging 4i we get the
value of I max so this here is our final
expression for I max and by writing it
like this we can actually see a bit more
what is going on so this says that the
maximum number of effectives so the
answer to the question that we are
interested in was the maximum number of
people that will have the disease at a
given time the maximum effective is
equal to the total population so to
begin with it's sort of everybody but
then we take away something here which
it turns out is positive now the
positive number depends a lot on this
parameter Q this contact ratio because s
nought for a disease like COBIT 19 for
example is everybody because this is the
first appearance of this disease and so
the whole population is in fact
susceptible to the disease initially so
s naught is sort of some very large
fixed number but the interesting thing
here is what happens as q varies if we
consider this as a function let's call
it f of X make it easier to plot then
what we're interested in is what f of X
looks like and then we just remember
that we're subtracting off f of X so we
want to plot 1 over x times 1 plus log
of x times some constant value s 0 and
what this is going to look like is as
follows so f of X and X we've got 1 over
X 1 plus log so we have this increase
very very sharp increase initially and
then the function starts to do something
like this and this peak up here is
around s naught now what does this mean
in practice so the key parameter here is
the value Q
which I've plotted as X on our graph and
this remember is the contact ratio this
is the fraction of the population that
comes into contact with an infected
individual so in the current outbreak of
Kovan 19 this value of Q is actually
really high because the disease is very
easy to transmit lots of people are
getting it and lots of people are coming
into contact with those that have it
especially due to this long incubation
period where the symptoms might not show
so ultimately for our model it means Q
is very very big for the co vid 19
outbreak and so looking at our graph if
Q is big or X on our graph then f of X
is actually very small so we're down
here at the far end of the graph and so
the value of F is actually quite small
and so what this means for our maximum
number of infective x' is that the
maximum number of people that can have
the disease at any given time is equal
to the total population minus this
function where our function in fact is
now quite small so this is very very bad
news for an outbreak that has a large Q
value like kovat 19 because this says
that the maximum number of people that
can catch the disease at one point in
time is actually most of the population
the third and final question that we
might want to ask about our disease
spread is how many people in total will
end up catching the disease and to
answer this question we actually need to
go back to assumption 1 and this idea of
the total population being constant we
first need to think about what does it
mean for the disease to end because if
we want to know the total number of
people that caught the disease we need
the actual spread of the disease to have
ended in the first place this means that
the number of effectives
must go down to zero so if we call this
point in the future just the end of the
outbreak then what we can do is look at
our total population equation and
actually rearrange to find the size of
our the removed component at the very
end of the outbreak because the number
of people who have either caught the
disease or died from the disease ie all
the people in the removed or our
component of the model will actually
then give you the total number of people
that have caught the disease so what we
can do is now rewrite this equation in
the yellow box for what it must look
like at the end of the epidemic so
everything here is known except s end so
we have the total population i naught
plus s naught minus the number of
susceptible people left at the end of
the epidemic to find the value of s end
what we do is in fact go back to our
equation from question to the one in
this blue box that came from integrating
the I by D s and now we let time
progress to the end of the epidemic so
we solve this equation to get the number
of susceptibles left at the end of the
epidemic s end and then we substitute
that value into this equation to get the
number of removed people or the size of
the removed population at the end of the
epidemic and this is exactly the answer
to how many people caught the disease
during the outbreak like we did before
to get a feel for what's going on here
we're going to consider the graph of
this function so if I plot s end as the
Y value up here and then on the x axis
I'm going to put Q our contact ratio
because as we saw in question 2 for the
maximum number of infective x'
that was really key in controlling the
behavior of the disease outbreak so here
we have Q so what I'm plotting really is
I have Y minus 1 over X times the log of
Y is equal to a load of constant values
minus 1 over X times again some other
constant so this approximately looks
something like as follows it comes
through here and then kind of goes flat
thinking again about the context of the
current kovat 19 outbreak we stared in
question 2 that the value of Q here this
contact
is very very high and so for a large
value of Q this is going to have a very
very small value over here so SN is
actually going to be quite small and
that is bad news once again in terms of
answering our question because our end
the total number of people who catch the
disease remember is equal to the total
population i naught plus s naught and
then subtracting off this s end value
but for a large value of Q s end is
small and so we're not really
subtracting off much from the total
population
so in summary quite a lot if not the
vast majority of the population will
actually catch the disease if the value
of Q is sufficiently large and so what
does this all mean for Co vid 19 I've
said throughout this video that this
contact ratio Q is really key to
determining this behavior and we can see
it very clearly in these three answers
to our important questions about this
spread of disease so what we're seeing
here is that if Q is large then first of
all the disease will spread an epidemic
will occur of course it's a bit too late
to say this now there already is a
pandemic happening all over the world
question two it tells us that the
maximum number of infective x' so the
maximum of people have the disease at a
given time is equal to everybody - this
function of Q and we saw that the
function of Q was actually small for a
large value of Q so in the case of Kovan
19 the maximum effectives at any given
time is almost equal to the whole
population and then for question three
we asked how many people will catch the
disease again for kovin 19 q is large
this contact ratio and so this tells us
that basically again most of the
population or the vast majority will
catch the disease for a large value of Q
now of course we kind of knew all of
this there is an epidemic and that most
of those are going to catch it but what
this model tells you and I should stress
this is possibly one of them
basic disease models you can do but the
power in mathematical models is that
they not only tell you things that may
seem obvious but they also tell you how
to alter things and control things and
get them back under control and back in
your favor what we can see here from our
simple model is the importance of this
contact ratio cue it appears in the
answers to all three of our key
questions so whilst we can't stop the
spread anymore that's already happened
what we can do is look at questions two
and three because we can see that if we
want to reduce the number of people that
have the disease at a given time
IMAX then what we need to do is we need
to make the value of F as large as
possible and we saw earlier on our graph
that this happened when Q was small and
similarly for question three the total
number of people catching the disease we
want to make G of Q we want to make that
as large as possible so that the total
number of people gets much smaller and
again that happened for a smaller value
of Q so what can we do to reduce the
value of Q Q remember is the contact
ratio this is the fraction of the
population that comes into contact with
an infective individual during their
period of infectiousness so this is
exactly why currently we are told to
wash our hands if you wash your hands
even if you have been in contact with
somebody with the disease you are much
less likely to then catch it yourself
social distancing this is why we have
new measures telling us to keep away
from people because if you stay away
from other people you are reducing your
probability of coming into contact with
somebody that has the disease and you're
therefore reducing this value Q so we
need to do everything we can to reduce
the value q and all of the current
measures are telling us to do exactly
that so if you weren't convinced already
I hope that you are now let's keep
washing our hands let's keep practicing
social distancing and ultimately let's
try and lower the value of the contact
ratio Q because
we've seen here in the SAR model the
lower the value of Q the fewer people
that catch the disease thank you
everyone for watching please do
subscribe to my channel if you've
enjoyed this video and I will be back
soon and remember keep rocking maths
you